---
title: The Beginning of the Universe
date: 2008-05-29
slug: the-beginning-of-the-universe
category: Evolution
summary: One of the basic questions of life is “How did I get here”? Either evolution is correct (from the goo to the zoo to you) and the universe came into being from nothing by itself, or some god or other being created the universe and life.
tags: 
  - Math
  - Creation
  - Science
  - Handwaving
redirect_from:
  - /2008/05/beginning-universe.html
---



One of the basic questions of life is “How did I get here”? Either
evolution is correct (from the goo to the zoo to you) and the universe
came into being from nothing by itself, or some god or other being
created the universe and life.

If you accept the existence of God, you’ve got answers to life’s basic
questions (Why am I here? Where did I come from? Where am I going?). But
for the evolutionist, answering the question of where we came from
raises two basic possibilities for the creation of the universe:

1.  The universe is eternal.
2.  The universe had a beginning.

An eternal universe isn’t accepted much anymore (perhaps Carl Sagan was
its last proponent when he said “The Cosmos is all that is or ever was
or ever will be”) — the discovery of an expanding universe crushed the
eternal universe idea; most scientists believe the universe is around 15
billion years old (in a nice round number). Of course, that means the
universe had a beginning — a time existed when there was *nothing* (no
space, time or matter). Then how did the universe come into existence?


## The Evolutionary Perspective

Evolution proposes the Big bang theory — first there was nothing, and
then it exploded. The big-bang theory may be wrapped in scientific
handwaving and technical terms, but the basic idea remains: first there
was nothing, then a singularity, and then an explosion and rapid
expansion forming what we now call the universe.

Of course, that can’t explain how or why this happened suddenly, and no
experimental data exists. In fact, no experiment has ever been done
demonstrating how something comes from nothing (or life coming from
non-life, but that’s a whole other problem for evolution).

One of the laws of Physics is matter can neither be created nor
destroyed. So how did this explosion occur? If *nothing* existed
(including space itself), what caused the explosion? And where are the
experiments showing matter comes from nothing, and explosions
produce order?

Not much proof here, and certainly it isn’t science (as it fails to
follow the scientific method by not using experimental data). The
evolutionist must accept the dogma of the big bang on faith alone as
science can never get back to time = 0 (as they run into the Planck time
problem). Belief in the big bang certainly is their right, but *please*
don’t call it science — it has no experimental data and is taken on
faith alone — wrapping it in
[handwaving](http://www.answers.com/topic/handwaving) doesn’t count.


## The Christian Perspective


> In the beginning God created the heaven and the earth. (Genesis 1:1 KJV)

The Hebrew word for “created” is bara, implying created and assembled
*from nothing*. That solves the issue, and since science can *never* get
back to t=0, God is as good as answer as the big bang theory.

But some may complain God isn’t science! If it fits what we know (the
universe had a beginning — at one point nothing existed, and matter
can’t be created by itself), so be it. Evolutionists have deftly
re-defined science to mean naturalistic, atheistic explanations, and
thus leave out areas of knowledge they don’t want to believe in.

So *if* God exists, and *if* He is all-powerful, He’s the one who
created the laws of Physics in the first place, and can violate them at
will. Thus the beginning of the universe isn’t a problem for God.

## Conclusion

Some will complain we’re anti-science. Not true. Scientific inquiry is
good, and satisfies man’s natural curiosity. Unfortunately, by
eliminating entire areas of possibility it’s no longer a quest for fact,
but a means to eliminate God from consideration.

And that’s not very free-thinking, is it?
