---
title: The Sin of Sodom
date: 2009-01-01
slug: the-sin-of-sodom
category: Bible Study
summary: OK, trivia question time. Why did God judge Sodom? The answer we usually think of is actually *fifth* on the list.
tags: 
  - Sin
redirect_from:
  - /2009/01/sin-sodom.html
---



OK, trivia question time. Why did God judge
Sodom? The answer we usually think of is actually *fifth* on
the list.

> “Look, this was the iniquity of
>  your sister Sodom: She and her daughter had pride, fullness
>  of food, and abundance of idleness; neither did she
>  strengthen the hand of the poor and needy. “And they
>  were haughty and committed abomination before Me; therefore I
>  took them away as I saw fit. (Ezekiel 16:49-50 NKJV)

**Pride**. This is the *first* reason
given. It’s safe to say God hates pride. Perhaps because one
of his angels got into a lot of trouble for this very sin (Read
Isaiah 14 and Ezekiel 28). But what kind of pride could Sodom
have had? Perhaps it would be clearer to put a modern view on it.
“Good old American know-how”. That was their
problem. They had not given credit to God for their good fortunes
and instead began to believe they themselves had accomplished so
much. Just as in this country we have sadly abandoned God in our
schools and government, an instead rely on ourselves. Today
people even believe our founding fathers who formed this country
did not believe in God!

But God takes this issue of pride very
seriously. Just a few examples will get across the idea. First,
from the book of Acts

> So on a set day Herod, arrayed in royal
>  apparel, sat on his throne and gave an oration to them. And
>  the people kept shouting, “The voice of a god and not of
>  a man!” Then immediately an angel of the Lord struck
>  him, because he did not give glory to God. And he was eaten
>  by worms and died. (Acts 12:21-23)

Herod didn’t give the glory to God, and
suffered the punishment for it. In the book of Daniel,
Nebuchadnezzar had a similar problem as king of Babylon.

> All this came upon King Nebuchadnezzar.
>  At the end of the twelve months he was walking about the
>  royal palace of Babylon. The king spoke, saying, “Is not
>  this great Babylon, that I have built for a royal dwelling by
>  my mighty power and for the honor of my majesty?” While
>  the word was still in the king’s mouth, a voice fell from
>  heaven: “King Nebuchadnezzar, to you it is spoken: the
>  kingdom has departed from you! (Daniel 4:28-31)

God takes pride *very* seriously.

**Fullness of food**. The meaning of the
original Hebrew here (I’ve been told, since I don’t
know Hebrew) is the sensation of being stuffed but not satisfied.
While there is the obvious meaning here of food (consider how
many “weight loss” programs are around), consider also
the continual lust for more possessions in general. Things like
“What kind of car you drive tells others what kind of person
you are, so drive the latest Lexus, Mercedes, Acura, etc.”
And next year, the new models will be out, so don’t be
caught driving a year old car! Sadly in this country we have a
ravenous appetite for everything, and yet we are never satisfied.

**Abundance of idleness.** Today we seem to
have such an obsession with idle time. We are told to go on more
vacations, and relax more - remember you’ve earned it! But
remember God’s rule - work six days, and on the seventh
rest. Today in this country we’ve gone from working hard to
hardly working. And as we get more computers and gadgets, the
reason we are told to buy them is to increase our leisure time.
Many people also feel working 40 hours a week is too much, and
are trying to get the work week changed to 30 hours or less. But
one of God’s problems with Sodom was abundance of idleness,
and as we shall soon see, what they did in their idle time.

**Neither did she strengthen the hand of the
poor and needy.** Here also, our country’s thoughts are
only for themselves. Just as we are striving to satiate our own
needs, we continually ignore the needy in our country. It’s
always the other guy’s problem to help, and of course the
government. But we have distorted this idea. This does NOT mean
to give free handouts to everyone who wants them. Paul destroys
that idea in 2 Thessalonians 3:10 “If anyone will not work,
neither shall he eat.” Clearly the idea of work was
important. Some in the Thessalonian church had become lazy, and
Paul corrects them. But we also have an obligation and duty to
help others who are less fortunate than us. Just make sure we are
acting according to Biblical teaching.

And last on the list is they **committed
abomination before Me.** While this is last on the list,
it’s usually the first thing we think of with Sodom (see
Genesis chapter 19). Obviously they had serious sexual
perversion, and God says that’s wrong (in spite of the
modern politically correct thought). I don’t want to dwell
on this too much here, just to note the Bible is clear on this
issue. If you have any doubts, read the end of Romans chapter one.

So the question is, why do we only think of the
*last* reason on the list? Let’s assume all these
problems are equally bad, why do we only remember one? Perhaps
because most of us don’t have a problem with the last
one. However, the first four most of us could identify with. So
by conveniently ignoring 80% of the list, we make ourselves feel
better. Which is, of course, the sin of Pride, which is listed first.

Notice also the current condition of our
country fits these conditions almost perfectly. Once again we as
a country mainly only focus on the last reason, but the others
are just as equally apparent in our society. As Billy Graham says,

> If God does not judge America for her
>  sins, he will have to apologize to Sodom and Gomorrah.
