---
title: The Beginnings of the Financial Crisis
date: 2009-02-17
slug: beginnings-of-the-financial-crisis
category: Christian Living
summary: 'With all the talk of economic depression, stimulus, sub-prime mortgages — and of course all the political grandstanding, finger pointing, and attempts to use the situation to further political agendas, most people have a simple question: How did the country get in this mess?'
tags: 
  - Economics
  - Politics
  - Ethics
  - Morality
redirect_from:
  - /2009/02/beginnings-financial-crisis.html
  - /2009/02/beginnings-of-financial-crisis.html
---



With all the talk of economic depression, stimulus, sub-prime mortgages
— and of course all the political grandstanding, finger pointing, and
attempts to use the situation to further political agendas, most people
have a simple question:

How did the country get in this mess?

A good question, and one the media doesn’t cover much so we’ll try and
put the pieces together. But be warned while it’s not hard to
understand, it does take several pieces appearing unrelated until put
together. So stay with us, it’s going to be a wild ride, and plenty of
blame exists to go around — neither political party has clean hands.

The Beginning - Community Reinvestment Act
------------------------------------------

In 1977 under the Carter Administration, the 
[Community Reinvestment Act](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Community_Reinvestment_Act) passed
congress and became law. While it contained good intentions, it lays the
foundation for the current disaster. Certainly not by itself, but as
you’ll see, combined with reasonably foreseeable events, anyone studying
the law could understand how we arrived in this position (it is not, as
many politicians claim, completely unforeseeable and a
shocking revelation).

Basically, the CRA mandates banks loan money by the needs of the
community — it’s essentially a quota act designed to enable “easy
credit” for people who otherwise would not qualify for loans. From 1977
until about 1989, the act by itself did little damage (as long as the
housing market climbs, anyone losing their home owes less than the
mortgage, but we’re ahead of ourselves), but under President Bush and
Clinton, changes to the CRA set the stage for certain doom, guaranteeing
failure when combined with other factors.

ACORN and the 1990’s
--------------------

From 1977 until the 1990’s, the CRA didn’t cause too much damage — as
long as the market climbs and not too many sub-prime loans
were available.

However, in the 90’s and early 2000’s groups like
[ACORN](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Association_of_Community_Organizations_for_Reform_Now)
discovered the law could be used to force banks to make more sub-prime
loans, for example NINJA loans (NO income, NO job, NO assets). In short,
loans were made simply by signing for them — those making the loans
*knew* the loans could not be repaid, and the groups lobbying for more
sub-prime loans also knew those loans could not be repaid. Why do such a
thing? Two reasons:

1.  Community organizers and other groups (Congress) forced banks to
    make sub-prime loans for political and social reasons.
2.  Greed of the banks.

How can greed of the banks factor in? How can they profit from loans
they *knew* were bad? That’s the next key of the puzzle, coming right
after the dot-bomb era.

Stock Market Bubble
-------------------

During the stock market bubble (dot-bomb), money flowed and everyone was
happy. Until the crash, that is. Then (like now), cries for the
government to “fix it” arrived from every corner. Never one to miss the
opportunity of a crisis, the government lept into action. To stimulate
the economy, interest rates became low to encourage investing.

One problem with their “fix” — combine low interest rates with NINJA
loans, and what do you get? An exploding housing market! This of course
was what government wanted — economic recovery.

And life was good again, as everyone made piles of money, government and
community organizers got their housing to people who couldn’t pay the
loans, and all was good … until the housing market went down.

But by then (when the adjustable rates begin to change) interest rates
became more historically normal and many people couldn’t pay their
mortgage anymore. So all those sub-prime mortgages began to fail. And if
that’s all that happened, we still wouldn’t be in the mess today. So
we’ll diverge a bit, and then you’ll see how the pieces fit together.

Politics
--------

Republicans *used* to be known as the party of fiscal responsibility,
while the Democrats were tax-and-spend — Democrats haven’t changed, but
the Republicans sure have. They’re called “neo-cons” by some, and if
you’ve been involved in Republican politics you’ll know they’ve thrown
Conservatives off the cliff, while asking for donations on the way down.

The two parties now share a common fiscal irresponsibility, and both now
believe in massive deficit spending (with no viable means to pay it
back). Nobody in Washington believes in fiscal responsibility anymore,
and the hugely increasing deficit will at some point have to be paid.

President Obama already announced he’ll run trillion-dollar deficits for
his *entire* administration, and combine that with all the “stimulus”
floating around (already by some estimates at over 7 trillion), and in 4
years Obama’s administration could add 10-15 *trillion* to the deficit.

Leveraging
----------

While all this went on, investment banks used something called
“leveraging” to make piles of money, basically meaning borrow money to
invest. For example, if you have $1 to invest and you think you’ll make
10%, after one year you’ll make $.10 profit. But if you borrow $9, and
promise to return it at 5%, you’ll have $10 to invest, you’ll have $1
gross profit of which you’ll pay $.45 to the person you borrowed from,
and you’ll have $.35 more profit!

Sounds great, huh? And it is … as long as your investments pan out. It
doesn’t take a rocket scientist to figure out the risk involved if what
you invest in goes down. And it turns out some banks leveraged 40-1, so
when the investments went south, so did the banks.

But still, the mess would be contained to the mortgage market, except
for one more piece to the puzzle.

Securitization
--------------

Banks knew those sub-prime loans were bad, so a brilliant idea appeared
— package them together with “good” loans, and sell them to investors,
thus spreading the risk. Another great plan … except nobody really knew
how good those loans were (in spite of grade “A” ratings). They sold
little bags of doggie poo-poo, which worked as long as nobody looked in
the bags.

But once they did, they realized all they held was doggie poo-poo.

Additionally, those banks still didn’t want the bad loans around, so the
government came up with an idea — sell them to Fannie and Freddie! And
those on the government oversight committees thought it was a great idea
— banks continue to sub-prime loan, but they won’t complain because
they’ll sell the loans to Fannie and Freddie!

And their scheme worked great … right up until Fannie and
Freddie collapsed.

But Democrats like sub-prime mortgages (people who by definition can’t
pay back the loan), and Republicans enjoyed the banks profit, so nobody
in Washington cared and all bought into the scam. More regulation can’t
solve the problem, because all the bureaucrats in charge of oversight
were well aware of what was going on (either they deliberately lied to
the public or they simply lack understanding. Either way they allowed
the disaster to unfold right under their nose). Many of those in charge
of committees were among the largest recipients of Fannie and Freddie
lobbying money — so it’s no wonder they did nothing as they fed at the
trough as well, profiting from sub-prime loans.

The Problem in Brief
--------------------

Combine Securitization, leveraging and sub-prime mortgages, and you’ve
got the makings for the perfect economic storm. Banks were now only too
happy to sub-prime loan, knowing they would sell the loans to Fannie and
Freddie. Fannie and Freddie took the bad paper, securitized it, and sold
it to investment banks like Lehman and so on.

Lather-rinse-repeat. Life is good!

In short, Congress (through the CRA and other legislation) *mandated*
and *required* sub-prime loans, but Congress had the bright idea of
passing them off to Fannie and Freddie. Since banks no longer had to
keep the loans, they had no incentive to require people to afford the
loans. They profited from points and fees, and passed the debt off to
Fannine and Freedie. After the stock market bubble, when interest rates
went way down, this enabled many people who couldn’t afford mortgages to
get them (interest only, negative amortization, NINJA loans, etc). BOOM!
Housing bubble born, prices skyrocketed.

But when the economy turned around a bit, interest rates rose to more
normal levels. In 2006 and 2007, when those adjustable rate mortgages
came due to adjust, many people discovered they could no longer afford
their home. But as the overheated market cooled a bit, they found their
home wasn’t worth what they paid for it, and began to default on their
loans. Fannie/Freddie were left holding bags of doggie poo-poo
and collapsed.

But through securitization and leveraging, the toxic mess spread through
the banking system — Lehman and so on. Those banks became insolvent and
collapsed, as when the bags of securities were opened, everyone found
out they held nothing but doggie poo-poo — and the banks collapsed.

So this mess ultimately arose from two issues:

1.  Deficit spending.
2.  Credit expansion.

Both political parties were complicit in this disaster, though Democrats
controlling Congress the last few years were the most recent to refuse
to reform the system in order to advance their own political agenda,
while taking political contributions from the very people their
committees should have been overseeing.

The issue contains many more details we’ve left out, if you’re
interested the [wikipedia article of sub-prime crisis](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/2007_subprime_mortgage_financial_crisis)
has more information, and lots of links for further study. The economic
situation is one area you *must* investigate for yourself, as the media
rarely yields comprehensive information, and politicians won’t ever give
the complete story.

Solution
--------

What do the fearless leaders propose to solve this mess? Deficit
spending and credit expansion — Washington never learns the lesson from
history — many of the proposals have been attempted before, and none
worked as you can’t get out of a disaster caused by deficit spending and
credit expansion by spending more and expanding credit.

That sounds bad (and it is), but reality is even worse than that.
Examine the following graph provided from the [St. Louis Fed](http://research.stlouisfed.org/fred2/series/AMBNS) regarding the
Money Supply.

<p><img src="/images/blog/2009-02-financial-crisis-1.jpg" width="400" height="240" alt="Money supply graph" class="centered" /></p>

Notice the vertical line at the end? That’s how much money the
government has been pumping into the economy in an attempt to reduce the
crisis *they created*. What will be the end of all the spending?
Inflation. How do you end that? Raise interest rates. That makes a
recession, and then more “Stimulus”, then … lather-rinse-repeat.

Notice each “bubble” is worse than the previous? The housing bubble
exceeded the stock market bubble, and so on. The next bubble caused by
current government stimulus/bailout will be worse than the housing
bubble the country is in now.

The $800 billion spending bill & TARP can’t solve the problem, because
it’s more of the same — deficit spending and credit expansion.

The Looming Crisis
------------------

Anyone studying even casually knows the money doesn’t exist for any of
the so-called “stimulus” (much of which is pork, and not even stimulus),
so where are they going to get it? They’ll borrow it, of course (and tax
later for it, to be sure). Combine that with the fact we’re using more
oil than produced (and Obama and Congress refuse to seek out new
sources) and soon the energy crisis will be roaring back. Mix in the
tension with Israel and Iran. Stir in Social Security being broke
in 2017.

Where does that leave us? In big trouble.

No quick and easy fix exists. The recession caused by years of federal
mismanagement — ultimately deficit spending and credit expansion — has
now arrived. Yet the new administration desires to fix it be deficit
spending and credit expansion?

Don’t make the mistake current events are temporary and life will return
to normal again when the crisis ends. It can’t. The massive deficit,
coupled with those using the situation for political reasons shall alter
the landscape permanently.

Conclusion
----------

So is all hope lost? Are we doomed? Of course not. God is in control.

Don’t be afraid, as God still reigns and His will shall be done — read
the back of the book for answers as the end events are already known.
How the world goes from point “A” to point “B” isn’t known, but
obviously a major shift has begun.

Yet in any crisis, you can make two mistakes:

1.  Failing to prepare.
2.  Trusting in your preparations.

First, being a good steward *requires* preparation. It’s foolish to put
trust in government, even if they *could* solve the problem; you need to
be prepared for events which can be reasonably foreseen (do you have a
spare tire in your car?). But second, don’t trust in your preparations,
as it’s ultimately the Lord who provides. It’s quite easy to vear off to
one side or the other, but as with other areas of your life a balanced
approach is required. Yes, you must prepare, but don’t overly trust in
your preparations to the exclusion of the Lord.

Read through 2 Kings chapters 6–7 to see one example of how the Lord
works in spite of doomsday scenarios. During the siege, Israel has been
reduced to cannibalism as their food supply was cut off. Finally, a few
lepers decide to venture out side the city, as they’re going to
die anyway.

But the Lord drives off the Syrian army ahead of them, and they find
supplies and empty tents. Running back to the city, they inform the
King, and just as Elisha said previously, by the end of the day food
would be abundant again — and it was.

But the point remains, during the siege, if *you* were in the city,
would you have believed Elisha’s prophecy? No matter how dark events
appear to be, it’s never a lost cause as you and God are a majority
every time.

Be prepared as times change, but don’t trust in your preparations.

> The horse is prepared against the day of battle, but safety is of the
> Lord. (Proverbs 21:31 KJV)

