---
title: Jesus was a Republican
date: 2011-04-05
slug: jesus-was-a-republican
category: Heresy
tags: 
  - Social Justice
  - Politics
  - Logic
redirect_from:
  - /2011/04/jesus-was-republican-not-democrat.html
---



That got your attention, didn’t it? Jesus wants lower taxes, less
welfare, a balanced budget, reduction of the debt, loves Reagan and
Bush, but Clinton and Obama not so much.

Prove it wrong using the Bible.

You can’t for one simple reason — I’ll use the same methods the
promoters of social justice, universal salvation, red-letter
Christianity, and collective salvation use. Anytime you come up with a
verse I’ll apply one of the following techniques:

1.  That was for another time, the Bible needs to fit in with today’s
    society so that part doesn’t apply.
2.  That doesn’t really mean what it says, it’s actually an
    allegory for…

See the game? It doesn’t matter *what* you come up with, I can “prove”
Jesus was a Republican who would praise Reagan & Bush, reduce taxes, and
follow the complete Republican/Libertarian platform, while being against
Obama, Clinton (both), the Democratic party and socialism.

You can’t possibly win, so don’t bother trying.

But Seriously Folks
-------------------

Before the hate-mail comes in, no, Jesus wasn’t a member of the
Republican party, but “proving” it uses the *exact* same methods liberal
progressive “Christians” use to promote socialism (marxism, communism),
income and property redistribution, collective salvation, social
justice, universal salvation, and more.

See how absurd their methods are? If you’re going to reject what the
Bible says, at least have the honesty, guts, and integrity to say so
straight out.

### The Tactics of Heresy and Rebellion

Hiding behind a thin veneer of religion displays a willingness to reject
God, all while cloaking it in religious terminology — a tactic learned
from Saul Alinsky, by the way — you don’t have to *be* moral, but your
actions have to be cloaked in morality for people to buy it. Alinsky
dedicated his book “Rules for Radicals” to Satan, yet that’s the
philosophy permeating much of so-called “Christianity” (at least the
radical, liberal, progressive form).

In liberal “Christianity”, you don’t have to *be* Christian (or even
accept the Bible, or God), but you must cloak your ideology in a thin
veneer of Christianity so people will swallow it. It’s *exactly* the
Alinsky method used by people claiming to be “Christians” while they
reject what the Bible teaches.

Do you think it’s wise for the people who claim to be Christian to use
tactics from someone who openly admired Satan’s rebellion?

Does the Bible Form Ideas, or Ideas Mold the Bible?
---------------------------------------------------

Promoters of heretical ideas attempt to stuff the Bible into their
ideology, instead of forming their ideas *from* the Bible. Starting with
a pre-determined outcome (consensus) is *never* a good idea, but
Alinsky’s methods to manipulate people to a pre-determined idea are now
being used on (and in) the church.

Why succumb to tactics from the pit of hell? It’s one thing for the
world at large to fall for such tricks, but the church? Not just fall
for them, but openly embrace them? The question remains are those
promoting heresy aware they’re using Satan’s tactics (and trying to
deceive people), or are they just wildly un-educated in Biblical truth?

Examples
--------

Watch how easy the game is to play.

-   The alternate gospel of social justice,
    When the Bible speaks of charity, it doesn’t mean individual charity
    (even when it speaks of *you*), rather for today’s society that
    means it’s the governments job to redistribute money and property.
-   Progressive taxation. Sure Israel had a flat tax where everyone paid
    the same (with no exemptions), but the Bible didn’t anticipate
    greedy Wall Street barons. We’ve got to mold the Bible for today.
-   After all taxes are good
    from Romans 13, so forced confiscation of earnings (at rates far
    above what others pay) from one group to give to another (legalized
    theft) is Biblical.
-   Replacement theology.
    The church replaced Israel, thus we can blame modern Israel for all
    the problems.
-   God is love, thus when He speaks of Hell and your need to choose an
    eternal destination, it doesn’t really mean that — after all love
    wins and Hell isn’t a permanent situation.
-   Those crazy orthodox Christians who believe the Bible.
    Why don’t they just understand the Bible needs to be viewed in
    today’s light? It’s a living document which must change with
    the times.

See how to play the game? Liberal, progressive “Christians” (in name
only) fall back on the same two arguments: allegorizing and modernizing
the Bible. Those two tactics — combined with Alinsky’s methods — have
created all sorts of friendly sounding ideas hiding radical, unGodly,
unBibilcal, heretical ideas.

### Satan’s Rebellion Infects the Church

You’re free to accept or reject the Bible as you wish, but it’s the
hight of hubris and chutzpah to claim when God wrote in black and white
He didn’t really mean it. Those promoting the heresy of social justice,
collective salvation, red-letter Christianity, universal salvation,
replacement theology, and more, actually put themselves above God
proclaiming move over God, I’m smarter and I’ll ascend to the heavens, I
shall be like the Most High God.

Last time we checked, that attitude got a certain angel in a wee bit of
trouble (Isaiah 14:12–17 and Ezekiel 28:13–15) — of course, that’s
*exactly* why Alinsky admired Satan (read the preface as Alinsky admired
rebellion), and Alinsky’s methods are commonly used by the radical
far-left (so-called “Christian” or otherwise) as they not only reject
God’s Word, they’re in open rebellion against it as they promote
heretical ideas not found anywhere in the Bible.

Jesus Really was a Conservative
-------------------------------

Don’t equate conservative with Republican, but Jesus *was* a
conservative. The Pharisees were the liberal, progressive group as they
re-interpreted Jewish Law for their time, changing what it actually
said. Jesus returned to the original idea of the Law, thus was
a conservative.

Today’s progressive liberal “Christians” reject what God wrote in black
and white and substitute something else (using two main tactics), while
conservative orthodox Christianity takes the Bible for what it says.

Is repeating the failed liberalism of the Pharisees a good goal?

### Pharisees and Liberalism

Remember the Pharisees as the liberals changing what God said, while the
conservatives hold to the actual meaning. Nothing changes over 2,000
years, today’s liberal progressives still reject what God said and
substitute their own ideas, cloaking their heresy in a thin veneer of
religion hoping nobody will notice.

Those familiar with the Bible immediately spot their errors. Just ask a
liberal progressive where Jesus taught the church should lobby the
government to force Godless income redistribution and you’ll be met with
a deer-in-the-headlights look for the simple reason they *know* it
doesn’t exist, all while they continue to promote it.

So why do they promote such heresies when they know they’re false?
Instead of allowing the Bible to form their political views, they’ve
started with preconceived radical far-left ideas, and try to force the
square Bible into their round hole of liberal progressive ideas — just
like the Pharisees tried.

As Alinsky said, the end justifies almost any means; in the case of
liberal progressive “Christians”, that means to get the preconceived
ideological end they desire, they’ll abandon Biblical truth to get it.

Satan’s Two Tactics
-------------------

-   Allegorizing
-   Modernizing

Don’t fall for Alinsky methods leading you to a Godless religion. When
church programs sneak in to your fellowship, call them for what they are
— Godless heresies from the pit of Hell. Those programs can have nice
sounding names like social justice and red-letter Christianity, but
remember the methods used to promote those programs, and where Alinsky
got his methods from.

It’s a simple choice really, is the Bible the Word of God or not? If it
is, it needs to be followed. If not, why do people call themselves
“Christians”, all while rejecting the document describing what a
Christian is?

Deception, pure and simple. Who is the father of lies again?

**UPDATE Aug 18, 2012:** This article was linked from a blog on
beliefnet.com by an author who appeared to miss the point, so I’ll be
clear: This article is *NOT* trying to prove Jesus was a Republican.
Rather it uses the same dubious methods liberals use to prove anything
they want (social justice, universal salvation, etc) from the Bible.

Perhaps the writer of that blog missed this line: “Jesus wasn’t a member
of the Republican party, but proving it uses the exact same methods
liberal progressive ‘Christians’ use to promote socialism (marxism,
communism), income and property redistribution, collective salvation,
social justice, universal salvation, and more.”

If liberal, progressive “Christians” want to play games, those same
methods also can be used to show the opposite is also true — if a method
(liberal theology) can be used to “prove” anything, that method really
isn’t of much value, is it?

The focus isn’t on the political affiliation of Jesus, rather the
absurdity of liberal theology.

I hope that clears up any misunderstanding.

