---
title: The Fatal Flaw in Deutero-Isaiah
date: 2014-04-11
slug: the-fatal-flaw-in-deutero-isaiah
category: Logic
summary: 'The Deutero-Isaiah hypothesis is an absurd idea and is trivially easy to disprove. Instead, they rely on the the old standby: hand-waving.'
tags: 
  - Deutero-Isaiah
  - Handwaving
redirect_from:
  - /2014/04/the-fatal-flaw-in-deutero-isaiah.html
---



I get a lot of traffic on the Deutero-Isaiah hypothesis. Nevertheless, some people cling to the unproven idea, and ignore the
fatal flaw.

One complaint is I haven’t spent years reading hundreds of pages of
analysis, and dismiss their ideas without doing enough “scholarly” work.
I hear this complaint with evolution as well; the
you-don’t-know-because-you’re-not-a-scholar usually comes last from
people who can no longer defend their ideas.

I’m reminded of Richard Feynman. When asked to explain a difficult
advanced concept, he replied “I’ll prepare a freshman lecture on it.”
Later he said he couldn’t do it, he couldn’t reduce it to the freshman
level, *that means we really don’t understand it.*

Hiding behind stacks of paper isn’t sound research. In Physics we call
that “hand-waving” — trying to hide doggy poo behind equations, big
terms, and quantity of paper, hoping nobody notices.

When appeals are made to “you don’t really get it, it’s complex,” that’s
a good indicator of hand-waving, and the last resort of people refusing
to face the truth.

The multiple Isaiah theory depends on analyzing style — vocabulary,
sentence structure, mood, etc. A fact is different writings have
different style.

However, it’s *opinion* and *speculation* those differences prove
multiple authorship.

The Deutero-Isaiah fans *must* explain why 27.347% differences mean a
single author, but 27.348% means two (or more), and why 27.347% is the
dividing line in the first place.

They might claim no *specific* number exists, but claim the body of
evidence says too many inconsistencies prove multiple authors.
Hand-waving — when does the “body of evidence” tip the scale from a
single author to multiple? If they can’t provide an exact number (which
also works in other author analysis) it’s an admission their theory is
guesswork.

In the end, they guess multiple authors (let’s call them F, S, and C for
first author, second author, and compiler), but have no idea who F, S,
and C are, why they forged the book, when they lived, and why nobody
knows who they are.

Great theory — guesswork and speculation.

Consider a parallel example. I’m planning on building the largest, most
luxurious skyscraper ever. I’ve spent years with architects, engineers,
and designers creating thousands of pages of specifications,
calculations, and drawings.

One more thing you should know. I’ve decided to build on an unstable
swamp filled with muck and mud.

What do you think? Would you spend years looking at the design? Or just
say nothing you do will work, because the foundation can’t support it?

No, no, no! You’ve got to look at my drawings! You must consider the
mountains of work! These are smart people! Everyone believes it!

Well, maybe, but you can’t build on an unproven foundation, no matter
how much paper you throw at it.

Argh! You’re such a pathetic simpleton. Look at the experts. Challenge
their studies, if you can — you’re no student of skyscrapers, what do
you know?

Um, why take the time, don’t you know unstable swampland won’t support a
huge building? You’ve started with a poor foundation.

Exactly the same exchanges occur with Deutero-Isaiah fans. All the
so-called scholarship in the world can’t hide they have no idea how many
changes are required to “prove” multiple authors.

It’s possible for two documents to be similar, but from different
authors, and it’s possible for one person to write at different times,
with different moods, on different subjects, with quite large
differences.

Where does the dividing line exist? Do studies exist proving the
dividing line happens at 35.2845% of some set of changes? Of course not.
Absent that critical piece of information, they’ve got nothing.

It’s *guesswork*, speculation, and opinion how much change is allowed,
and since these people already have a bias towards multiple authors for
Isaiah, they’ll see what they want to, a logical problem called
confirmation bias.

To be reasonable for consideration proponents of multiple-Isaiah
theories *must* supply other evidence. Who are the three or four guys
involved writing and compiling Isaiah they claim existed? When did they
live? Why did they forge the book? That’s a good place to start.

Once they can show who F, S, and C are, *adding* to it style analysis
their theory might begin to have some merit.

I’m waiting.
